.. IQ-Plateforme-CHP documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Sun May 15 20:28:55 2022.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Institut Quantique High-Performance Computing Platform
======================================================

.. important::

   - Researchers in a hurry should at least read this page and the :doc:`summary
     <résumé>` before running their first job.
   - Beginners should check out our pages about learning :doc:`Linux
     <apprentissage/linux>` and :doc:`high-performance computing
     <apprentissage/chp>`.
   - Cette documentation est également disponible en `français
     <https://institut-quantique-udes.github.io/Presentation-Plateforme-CHP/fr/>`_.

The `Institut quantique (IQ) <https://www.usherbrooke.ca/iq/>`_ High-Performance
Computing Platform is a small-scale cluster for IQ researchers and their
collaborators, managed by the `Centre de calcul scientifique (CCS)
<https://www.ccs.usherbrooke.ca/>`_ at the `Université de Sherbrooke
<https://www.usherbrooke.ca/>`_. In addition to compute nodes and storage space
available to all IQ researchers, the platform hosts contributed hardware from a
number of research groups, access to which is restricted. There are no usage
limitations or fees. Costs are assumed through a Canada Foundation for
Innovation (CFI) grant.

The IQ HPC Platform is configured similarly to the national clusters managed by
the Digital Research Alliance of Canada (formerly Compute Canada): Linux
environment, available software, task submission and management commands, etc.
The `Alliance Technical Documentation
<https://docs.alliancecan.ca/wiki/Technical_documentation/en>`_ therefore also
applies to the IQ HPC Platform, and moving a calculation from one cluster to
another requires only minimal effort.

The IQ HPC Platform is meant as an intermediate resource and a springboard to
the more powerful Alliance clusters. When a personal workstation is not enough
to carry out your calculations or store your data, the IQ HPC Platform allows
you to quickly scale up your possibilities. For more demanding computational
research projects, see the Alliance `Getting Started
<https://docs.alliancecan.ca/wiki/Getting_started/fr>`_ guide.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :titlesonly:
   :hidden:

   compte
   connexion
   stockage
   nœuds
   tâches
   logiciels/index
   résumé

.. toctree::
   :caption: Help
   :maxdepth: 2
   :titlesonly:
   :hidden:

   aide/faq
   aide/liste
   aide/support

.. toctree::
   :caption: Training
   :maxdepth: 2
   :titlesonly:
   :hidden:

   apprentissage/linux
   apprentissage/chp

.. toctree::
   :caption: External links
   :hidden:

   Alliance Technical Documentation <https://docs.alliancecan.ca/wiki/Technical_documentation/en>
   Calcul Québec Training <https://www.calculquebec.ca/en/academic-research-services/training/>
   CCDB Portal <https://ccdb.alliancecan.ca/>

.. note::

   This documentation is managed by the CCS. The original author is Moïse
   Rousseau, the current maintainer Olivier Fisette. For any question or comment
   or to report a mistake or an issue, see our :doc:`technical support
   <aide/support>`.
