Technical support
=================

In addition to answering your questions and helping you with any difficulties
encountered while using the IQ HPC Platform, we are available if you require
training about Linux, HPC, etc.

Technical support is provided by Olivier Fisette (HPC analyst) with the help of
the other CCS team members.

Before anything else…
---------------------

Read the documentation before contacting us. We update it to reflect the changes
made to the platform and past questions. Perhaps yours already has an answer!

When contacting us, **include as many details as possible**: the job id, the
path to your files, the software you use, a description of the issue, how you
attempted to solve it, whether it also happens on other computers, etc. **Do not
copy/paste your files** and **do not attach files** to your original report;
instead, **give us the path to your files**. This is easier for you and allows
us to better understand the problem in its full context. **Do not delete or
modify your files** since we need them to understand the problem. **Do not send
screenshots** as they contain only partial information and can be hard to read.
If you have a problem with an interactive command, copy/paste from your terminal
the command and its entire output instead.

**Simplify the problem** as much as possible. Ideally, find a small dataset and
write a minimal job script that together reproduce your problem.

**For alliance clusters (formerly Compute Canada)**, see the Alliance `technical
support <https://docs.alliancecan.ca/wiki/Technical_support/en>`_ service
instead. If you would like for me to handle your request (I am also an analyst
for Calcul Québec), mention me in your email.

How to contact us?
------------------

Email
'''''

Write to olivier.fisette@usherbrooke.ca.

Slack
'''''

Send a message to `Olivier Fisette` on one of the following workspaces:

- `Calcul-IQ`
- `AlgoLab Quantique`

Online meetings
'''''''''''''''

I am available every day on the MS Teams and Google Meet platforms. Contact me
by email or on Slack to plan a meeting.

In-person meetings
''''''''''''''''''

I am available on the main campus every Monday and, by appointment, on other
days. Contact me by email or on Slack to plan a meeting.
